---
date: "2024-07-16"
spoiler:
  "Optimize your code review process by stacking pull requests, ensuring each
  introduces only one new behavior for easier, faster reviews."
title: "Many small pull requests"
url: "/blog/stacked-pull-requests"
collections:
  - code-review
published: true
---

# Many small pull requests

Okay, so you are working on a new feature. Because your team operates using a
pull request-based workflow, someone needs to review your code before it lands
in the main branch and is released to all users. In the last retrospective,
there was a lot of frustration among peers because code reviews usually take
hours or even days to complete, and still, there is a lot of rubber-stamping or
minor comments about code style (things that could be easily automated with
better linters).

This time, you will try to approach it a bit differently and optimize for
reviewing rather than your own immediate productivity (which gets hurt in the
long term anyway due to delays in code review). Based on your experience as a
reviewer, code reviews start to get complicated not when they involve many file
changes but when they change multiple behaviors at the same time. For example, a
pull request with 300 file changes where you're simply renaming a constant is
much easier to review than a pull request with 4 file changes that modify four
different system behaviors.

This time, you plan to slice your work in a way that you can create more than
one single pull request, ensuring each pull request only introduces one new
behavior into the system (a variable rename, a change to existing logic). The
only problem with this approach is that no one on the team operates this way,
and you are unsure whether it is possible to merge incomplete feature code into
the main branch or if there is a way to hold off on all the changes but still
allow for incremental reviews.

A few months ago, someone from the billing team shared a recent experiment using
feature flags to turn on and off certain logic in production based on a
configuration that’s easily accessed by a UI. Leveraging feature flags sounds
like a sensible approach. That way, you could wrap all the new code under a
feature flag that’s deactivated by default and only enabled once all pull
requests have been merged into the main branch and the feature is code complete.
But it seems the feature flag infrastructure is a bit experimental in the
company, and you’re unsure whether it will be safe for your team to start
relying on them.

But wait, there might be ways to achieve a similar code reviewing experience
(note from the author: yeah, deploying code behind feature flags offers many
more benefits than just facilitating code review, but that’s part of another
series) by stacking pull requests. For example, you can create a first branch
for your initial set of changes and then branch off again with the new set of
changes. This second pull request will be based on the first branch instead of
the main branch, so the diff is clear and only shows the new set of incremental
changes.

Although stacking pull requests may become a bit tricky with large feature
developments, it offers a good compromise for small to medium developments. You
just need to make sure each new set of changes branches off from the previous
branch. Then, each pull request will use the previous branch as the base branch
for comparison. You don't need to merge each pull request independently; they
are there just to facilitate the code review process. Once each step has been
approved by your team, you can create a final pull request containing all the
changes and use that to release the code. It's true the process accounts for
some minimal duplication, but the benefits of having small, reviewable units
persuade you to give it a try.

![Diagram illustrating the stacked pull requests workflow with branches and incremental changes.](/static/articles/stacked-pull-requests/how-it-works.jpg "Illustration of the stacked pull requests workflow, showing how incremental changes build upon each other for streamlined code reviews.")

The only problem: you have never worked this way before, and typically, your
feature development is a bit chaotic. Although you know the end goal, you’re
usually figuring out the way to get there as you experiment with the codebase.
This time, however, you may need a clearer plan to slice your work correctly for
reviewing, following the principles you stated before (each pull request will
only contain one change in behavior).

All your teammates have small differences in the way they approach feature
development. Thinking about it for a second, you realize Sara uses something she
calls an “Implementation Plan” and regularly posts it as a comment on the issue
even before writing a single line of code. Reflecting a bit more, each step in
Sara’s implementation plan typically matches the principles you’ve stated
before: each pull request introduces only one new behavior into the system.

Deciding to follow Sara’s approach, you take a few hours to design a possible
solution for the problem. There might be a few surprises along the way, but the
implementation plan looks solid and has already given you some hints about how
you may slice the problem. You have already identified a little refactoring you
need to accomplish in the first instance that is better encapsulated in its own
pull request so Jose, one of the experts on that part of the system, can take a
look. Actually, now that you look at the plan, you realize it might be a good
moment to ask Sofia, the tech lead for your team, to chime in so she can give
you a thumbs-up now that you haven’t invested too much time in development.
Working in smaller batches has already proven to be helpful even before creating
the first pull request.

--

So, the little story above is just an example of how we may approach software
development in a way that favors creating many small pull requests instead of a
single one. Obviously, your mileage may vary, as may the experience around your
team, but regularly incorporating this notion of 1 pull request = 1 behavior
should facilitate both your development (because you’ll be working with less
complexity at every step) and your code review process.

Implementation plans are just a technique that may help you divide your work in
a way that makes sense and follows the principle we’ve stated before. They may
also contribute to other benefits such as discovering potential blockers,
incorporating feedback from your colleagues early in the process, or offering
you some guidance as you move forward with the development.

We have already covered how stacking pull requests may work at a high level.
Some tools support this kind of process by default (e.g., Phabricator via
stacked diffs), but a similar workflow can be easily replicated in tools such as
GitHub or GitLab (although the developer experience could be much better).

But as with almost everything in software, there isn’t a silver bullet. One
drawback of slicing your work this way is that reviewers may find it more
complex to see the whole picture of your changes. While this can be minimized by
offering links to previous pull requests, having all your changes in a single
pull request can make it easier for them to understand the context and scope. On
the other hand, a large pull request with dozens of changes can also be
overwhelming and, as we have discussed before, delay the overall reviewing
process because reviewers need to deal with more complexity.

If you're looking for cost-effective ways to improve the code review process on
your team, give stacked pull requests a try or, at the very least, aim to
conform to the rule of one behavior change = one pull request.
